The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw
Elizabeth into, could not be easily overcome; nor could she, for many
hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings,
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with
Mr. Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but from what the
report of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to
imagine; till she recollected that his being the intimate friend of
Bingley, and her being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when
the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to
supply the idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the
marriage of her sister must bring them more frequently together. And
her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their
communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had
reached Lady Catherine), had only set that down as almost certain and
immediate, which she had looked forward to as possible at some future
time.

In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not help
feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her
persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her
resolution to prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that
she must meditate an application to her nephew; and how he might take
a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with
her, she dared not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his
affection for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was
natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her ladyship than
she could do; and it was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of
a marriage with one, whose immediate connections were so unequal to
his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his
notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which
to Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good
sense and solid reasoning.

